# Facial Recognition: The Good, the Bad and the Ugly
For this assignment, I discuss two articles about the use of facial recognition by police departments. The articles provide opposing viewpoints 

## Article 1
In his op-ed for the New York Times, [How Facial Recognition Makes You Safer](https://www.nytimes.com/2019/06/09/opinion/facial-recognition-police-new-york-city.html), [former] New York Police Commissioner James O'Neill argues in favor of the NYPD's use of facial recognition. O'Neill vividly recalls the 1980s, when the use of "fingerprint cards and Polaroid mug shots" were the standard. This stark contrast provides a glimpse into a time when technology wasn't as prevalent and further highlights how technology has shaped our lives. Having experienced both realities, O'Neill claims that "technology has improved the profession beyond what the most imaginative officer could have conceived in those days," but besides providing noticeable improvements, technology has introduced equally as tangible concerns. 

O'Neill acknowledges the public's concerns, specifically the threat towards their right to privacy, but remains firmly in favor of using new technologies. O'Neill highlights instances where facial recognition has proved helpful to the NYPD while downplaying its significance throughout the investigatory process. Furthermore, O'Neill attempts to ease concerns by explaining the multistep process and its many safeguards, mentioning how the "database [consists] solely of arrest photos" and condemning the use of _fingerprint guessing_. Regardless of your position, "biometric technology is no longer new," and similar technologies will continue to emerge.

## Article 2
Josh Marcus and Alex Woodward introduce a more critical perspective in their article titled [Wrongly arrested because of facial recognition: Why new police tech risks serious miscarriages of justice](https://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/americas/crime/facial-recognition-technology-police-arrests-b2413116.html). The authors raise concerns regarding the methodology used during the investigatory process and examine the role of facial technology in said process, claiming that they are "overused, underregulated, and often wrong." 

Porcha Woodruff, who was 8 months pregnant, was arrested at her doorstep following an investigatory process that relied on facial recognition. Using security camera footage and a mugshot from 2015, Woodruff was singled out from a lineup of possible matches. During her 11 hours in jail, she suffered "panic attacks and early contraptions" and was subsequently diagnosed with dehydration. Shortly after being released from bond, the case against her was dropped. Woodruff's case "underscores the growing risk of civil rights violations" that lead to unnecessary traumatic experiences. Woodruff's case is not an annomoly, many others, especially people of color, have experienced identical situations. Crimial justice advocates argue that these programs are "riddled with the same biases," and perhaps there's some truth to that as "datasets often lack full diversity." 

When questioned about Woodruff's case, Detroit police chief James White claimed "poor investagative work led to the false arrest not facial recognition technology," but if that's the case then facial recognition is an "unreliable shortcut around methodical human police work." 